---
title: "Solo Roleplay"
date: 2023-07-28T00:50:49Z
draft: false
description: |
    What is this solo roleplaying thing? Is it journaling, hallucinating by
    yourself, or just writing a story?
tags:
  - role-play
  - solo-rpg
  - ttrpg
  - rpg
---
# Sole Role-play

At the end of 2021 I got a big urge to play my role-playing games I had
collected before to read while playing the supposed "most popular game". I had
all of these book and I only ever got to read them, day dream, and then go roll
a d20 and accept mediocre. So, I had the idea to search YouTube for how to play
role-playing games by yourself, and then I searched DriveThruRPG. I found a few
YouTube channels at the time that had a running story and some people talking
about game master emulators, but I thought I could do it better! I had heard
about Ironsworn, but Powered by the Apocalypse games never really groked with me
then, and I wanted to play something else. I had this stack of Genesys and Star
Wars books and dice so I made a starting scene. Long story short, the story
"finished", but it ultimiately fizzled out because I didn't know how to drive
the "what's next?" aspect. I bought a ton of supplements and most of them never
really clicked for me. That was until I bought this little red book called
Mythic Role Playing.

Mythic Role Playing, MRPG, is a role-playing game first published in 2003 by a
little company called Word Mill Games. I say little, but it was really one
person. The author, Tana Pigeon, wrote MRPG because she felt that role-playing
games didn't fulfill what she wanted. The Game Master Emulator section of MRPG
became popular and then Mythic Game Master Emulator, MGME, was published. For
nearly 20 years the MGME was the standard for solo role-playing for many people.
This supplement helped me learn how to design a scene, test the expectations,
and then alter or interrupt what I wanted. This allowed me to let go, trust the
tables, and exercise my interpretation of what was going on and then lean into
expectations again. However, I explored still. I then purchased the Game
Master's Apprentice decks, ALONe, DM Yourself, and GEMulator, but nothing
resounded as much as Mythic.

Mythic has enlightened me and helped me master on-the-fly Game Mastering, and
also idea generation that is within the context and fiction of the universe;
even if I made it up all impromptu. I've been able to pick up games I have and
test them out, play and learn the rules and mechanics before bringing it to the
table. Then I've also found my energy for reading, studying, and mastering those
rules. MGME has helped me figure out which games I actually enjoy playing rather
than conceptually from reading.

As of early 2023, Word Mill Games, Tana Pigeon, released Mythic Game Master
Emulator Second Edition with content and systems from 20 years, supplements, and
magazine articles written for the system. I look forward to Mythic Role Playing
Second Edition as well! Join the Discord group too!

- https://www.wordmillgames.com
